# Chapter 1

## Theory

### Concepts

**Node**: Device in a network.
**Topology**: Organization of nodes in a network.
**Bandwidth**: Amount of data we can send over a network connection in an interval of time.
**Latency**: Measure of time that passes between sending a network resource request and receiving a response.
**Protocol**: Rules and procedures that determine the format an order of data sent over a network.
**Encapsulation**: Method of hiding implementation details or making only relevant details available to the recipient.
**Horizontal Communication**: Communication between the client and the server in the same layer.

#### Topology Types

- **Point-to-Point**

Two nodes share a single connection.

- **Daisy Chain**

Series of point-to-point nodes.

- **Bus**

Nodes see all traffic, but only the receiver accepts the data from the sender.

- **Ring**

Nodes are in a closed loop and they data travels in a single direction, which means that the traveling speed is dependent of the slowest node in the chain.

- **Star**

Nodes are connected to a central node, usually a network switch, that is responsible for sending data between them.

- **Mesh**

Nodes are connected to all other nodes, what makes the network more reliable, although more complex.

- **Hybrid**

Nodes are connected in combinations of the other topologies, generally looking to overcome their own drawbacks.

#### Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model

- **Layer 7: Application Layer**

Responsible for identifying hosts and retrieving resources. Ex: Browsers.

- **Layer 6: Presentation Layer**

Prepares data for the network layer when moving down the stack, and it presents data to the application layer when data moves up the stack. Ex: Encryption.

- **Layer 5: Session Layer**

Manages the connection life cycle between nodes on a network. It establishes connections, manages connection time-out, coordinates the mode of operation and terminates connections.

- **Layer 4: Transport Layer**

Controls and coordinates the transfer of data between two nodes while maintaining the reliability of the transfer. It corrects errors, controls the speed of data transfer, chunks or segments the data, retransmitting missing data and acknowledges received data.

- **Layer 3: Network Layer**

Responsible for transfering data between nodes. It allows you to send data to a network address without having a direct point-to-point connection to the remote node.

- **Layer 2: Data Link Layer**

Handles data transfers between two directly connected nodes. This layer identifies and attempts to correct errors on the physical layer.

- **Layer 1: Physical Layer**

Converts bits from the network stack to electrical, optic or radio signals suitable for underlying physical medium and from the physical medium back to bits. This layer also controls the bit rate.

> [!INFO]
> We often call the data traveling down the stack a *payload*, *message body* or *service data unit (SDU)*.
